\phantomsection
\subsection*{V.3—Foucault: Discipline, Biopower, and the Internalized Gaze}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{V.3—Foucault: Discipline and Biopower}
\label{ssec:v-foucault}
Michel Foucault's \textit{Discipline and Punish} (1975) shows how modern power operates not 
through sovereign violence but through normalization. Classical sovereignty killed to punish; 
modern discipline produces docile, productive subjects by training their bodies and managing 
their perceptions \parencite{FoucaultDiscipline1995}. The prison, the school, the barracks all 
share a technique: surveillance, timetables, drills, examination. The subject internalizes the 
gaze---learns to monitor, correct, and optimize itself. Power becomes invisible because it is 
everywhere, threaded through the routines that constitute ``normal'' life.

Willard's training, files, and surveillance are not contingent backdrops; they \emph{are} the 
conditions under which a mission can be willed, received, and fulfilled. He has been drilled, 
monitored, filed. The dossier that describes Kurtz also positions Willard: special forces, 
disciplined, reliable. To ``want a mission'' is already to have been shaped by the disciplinary 
apparatus into a subject who experiences assignment as relief. Foucault would say: the system 
does not coerce from outside; it trains desire from within. Willard's wanting is the product of 
his normalization.

Foucault's later concept of \emph{biopower} extends this analysis to population-level 
management: modern states do not just punish individuals; they optimize populations through 
medicine, welfare, urban planning. Life itself becomes an object of 
administration. The war machine in \textit{Apocalypse Now} exhibits this logic: soldiers are 
resources to be deployed, casualties are statistics, ``body counts'' measure success. The 
mission treats Kurtz's rogue sovereignty as a threat to this biopolitical order---he has 
claimed the power over life and death that the state reserves for itself. Eliminating him 
restores the state's monopoly on biopower.

In this frame, ``everyone gets everything he wants'' becomes sinister: the system produces the 
conditions under which wanting aligns with administrative goals. Want a mission? The bureaucracy 
has one ready. Want action, danger, meaning? The apparatus can supply all three, pre-packaged. 
The punishment is not deprivation but the discovery that one's subjectivity has been colonized. 
Foucault asks: where does resistance come from, if power produces the subject who would resist? 
\parencite{FoucaultDiscipline1995}. Willard's journey offers no answer; it only shows the will 
turned back on itself, completing the mission it was trained to want.

The sampan scene is Foucault's nightmare made visible. The protocol is rational, the procedure 
is disciplined, every soldier performs his role. Yet the outcome is horror. Foucault would note 
that horror here is not a breakdown of discipline but its perfection: the system worked, bodies 
were managed, the threat was neutralized. Moral revulsion has no traction within disciplinary 
logic. ``Getting what one wants'' (a secure perimeter, a checked boat) exposes the vacancy of 
wanting shaped entirely by procedure.

